>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 8:
THE UNITED STATES PLANS TO
ESCALATE AIRSTRIKES AGAINST
ISIS, IN SYRIA, AND POSSIBLY
SEND MORE GROUND TROOPS.
TENS OF MILLIONS OF VOTERS TURN
OUT FOR A HISTORIC FREE ELECTION
IN THE SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATION OF
MYANMAR.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
UNACCOMPANIED IMMIGRANT CHILDREN
FROM CENTRAL AMERICA HOPING TO
STAY IN THE U.S. LEGALLY.
>> (translated): IF I WERE
DEPORTED, I'D BE TERRIFIED TO GO
BACK.
ALL OF MY DREAMS, MY PLANS,
WOULD CRUMBLE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WE BEGIN WITH THE UNITED STATES'
ESCALATING MILITARY ROLE IN
SYRIA'S CIVIL WAR.
LAST WEEK, PRESIDENT OBAMA
ANNOUNCED THE DEPLOYMENT OF 50
SPECIAL FORCES TO AID REBEL
GROUPS FIGHTING THE MILITANTS
WHO CALL THEMSELVES THE ISLAMIC
STATE OF IRAQ AND SYRIA, KNOWN
AS ISIS.
NOW, IN AN INTERVIEW WITH ABC
NEWS RELEASED TODAY, DEFENSE
SECRETARY ASH CARTER SAID THE
U.S. COULD "DO MORE" TO HELP
LOCAL GROUND FORCES IN THAT
FIGHT, AND "THEY MAY FIND
THEMSELVES IN COMBAT."
>> IF A GROUP INDICATES A
WILLINGNESS TO FIGHT, WE'LL GIVE
THEM SOME EQUIPMENT AND SEE HOW
THEY DO.
IF THEY PROVE CAPABLE, THEN
WE'LL PROVIDE THEM WITH SOME
MORE INFORMATION, MAYBE SOME
AIRSTRIKES.
IF THEY PROVE REALLY CAPABLE AND
REALLY DEDICATED, THEN WE MIGHT
SEND SOME PEOPLE IN TO BE WITH
THEM AND TRAIN AND ADVISE THEM
DIRECTLY.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR THE PAST
YEAR, THE U.S. HAS LED A
COALITION THAT HAS CARRIED OUT
CLOSE TO 3,000 AIRSTRIKES
AGAINST POSITIONS HELD BY ISIS
INSIDE SYRIA.
U.S. WARPLANES HAVE CARRIED OUT
95% OF THOSE ATTACKS, AND
WESTERN AND ARAB ALLIES SEEM TO
BE TURNING THEIR ATTENTION
ELSEWHERE."
NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER ERIC
SCHMITT IS COVERING THIS ISSUE,
AND HE JOINS ME NOW FROM
WASHINGTON.
WHAT'S HAPPENED TO THE
COALITION?
I REMEMBER THE GENERALS TALKING
ABOUT OUR ARAB PARTNERS FLYING
WITH US, MAKING THESE RAIDS.
>> THEY CERTAINLY DID ON THE
FIRST, IN THE FIRST NIGHT OF
THOSE RAIDS A YEAR AGO.
BUT WHAT HAPPENED SIBS
THEN-- SINCE THEN IN PARTICULAR,
SINCE MARCH, SAUDI ARABIA AND
THE UNITED ARAB EMIRATES HAVE
HAD TO TAKE ON THE FIGHT AGAINST
HU TI REBELS IN YEMEN, SO A LOT
OF THEIR AIR POWER HAS BEEN
DIVERTED TO YEMEN TO TRY AND
FIGHT THAT FIGHT.
SOME OF THE OTHER COUNTRIES THAT
ARE ALSO PARTICIPATING,
INCLUDING JORDAN OUT OF
SOLIDARITY TO THE SAUDIS HAVE
ALSO SHIFTED SOME OF THEIR
COMBAT MISSIONS TO YEMEN AS
WELL.
SO THESE COUNTRIES ARE STILL
FLYING A FEW MISSIONS EVERY NOW
AND THEN BUT THEY'VE HAD TO
SHIFT THEIR AIR FORCES TO OTHER
PRIORITIES.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT
JUST EVEN MOVING THE AIR FORCES
CLOSER TO THE FIGHT, NOT KEEPING
THEM OUT ON THE PERSIAN GULF BUT
PERHAPS STAGING THEM IN TURKEY.
THAT WAS A HUGE ADVANTAGE FOR
THE UNITED STATES.
>> IT CERTAINLY WAS, AND
SOMETHING THE PENTAGON HAD
WANTED TO DO ALL ALONG WAS USE
THE TURKISH AIR BASE WHICH CAN
CUT DOWN THE FLIGHT TIMES TO
SYRIA TO AS LITTLE AS 15 MINUTES
TO THE BORDER AS OPPOSED TO A
FIRE HOUR FLIGHT FROM SOME OF
THE PERSIAN GULF BASES.
BUT MANY OF THE EUROPEAN ALLIES
WHO ARE FLYING MISSIONS IN IRAQ
AND A FEW IN SYRIA, COUNTRIES
LIKE AUSTRALIA AND FRANCE, THEY
HAVE LONG-STANDING RELATIONSHIPS
WITH THESE MIDDLE EASTERN
COUNTRIES AND THEY DON'T
NECESSARILY WANT TO UPROOT AND
MOVE THEIR FORCES TO TURKEY
AND SET UP NEW ARRANGEMENTS WITH
THE TURKS THERE, IF THAT WOULD
BE DISRUPTIVE TO THEIR
OPERATIONS.
EVEN THOUGH IT SAY LONGER FIGHT,
THEY'RE WILLING TO STAY WHERE
THEY ARE AT, AT LEAST FOR NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
COORDINATION OR CONFRONTATION
WITH RUSSIA?
I MEAN WE KNOW WHERE THEIR
PLANES ARE.
THEY KNOW WHERE OUR PLANES ARE.
BUT SOMETIMES SEEM TO BE GOING
AFTER DIFFERENT TARGETS.
>> THEY ARE.
THE RUSSIANS HAVE BEEN PRIMARILY
IN THE NORTH WESTERN PART OF
SYRIA, ATTACKING TARGETS THAT
ARE RIB EL-- REBELS ON THE
GROUND THAT ARE FIGHTING, THE
GOVERNMENT AND PRESIDENT BASHAR
AL-ASSAD.
THE U.S. TENDS TO FOCUS MORE IN
THE EAST.
AND THOSE ARE TARGETS THAT ARE
MORE ISIS TARGETS.
JUST THIS WEEK, HOWEVER, THERE
WAS A COORDINATION EXERCISE
WHERE THE U.S. AND RUSSIANS
ACTUALLY EXCHANGED A
COMMUNICATION JUST SO THEY CAN
TALK TO EACH OTHER AND TRY AND
AVOID CRASHING TOO EACH OTHER IN
THE SKIES OVER SYRIA.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE
CONCERN THAT THIS COULD BE THE
BEGINNING OF KIND OF MISSION
CREEP, PUTTING SPECIAL FORCES ON
THE GROUND OR PUTTING SPECIAL
ADVISORS ON THE GROUND, IS ONE
STEP TRYING TO INCREASE OUR AIR
CAMPAIGN, IS ANOTHER STEP?
>> WELL, CERTAINLY THAT'S WHAT
THE CRITICS IN CONGRESS AND
ELSEWHERE ARE SAYING OF THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S DECISION,
TO PUT THOSE 50 OR SO SPECIAL
OPS GUYS ON THE GROUND.
THOSE FORCES WILL BE THERE TO
HELP COORDINATE INTELLIGENCE, TO
BASICALLY GIVE ADVICE TO THE
SYRIAN REBELS ON THE GROUND IN
THE EAST.
AS THEY PUSH TOWARD ROCA, THE
SELF-PROCLAIMED CAPITAL OF ISIS
IN EASTERN SYRIA.
THE AIR CAMPAIGN AS YOU SAID,
INCREASING BOTH THE NUMBERS OF
AIRCRAFT AND SHIFTING CLOSER TO
THE FIGHT IN TURKEY IS AIMED AT
IMPROVING THE EFFICIENCY OF AN
AIR CAMPAIGN THAT SO FAR HAS
COME UNDER CRITICISM FOR NOT
PUTTING ENOUGH PRESSURE ON ISIS.
>> Sreenivasan: I WAS GOING TO
ASK, HOW DOES THE ADMINISTRATION
I SHOULD SAY HOW DOES THE
MILITARY MEASURE ITS SUCCESS
IN THIS AIR CAMPAIGN?
>> WELL, THE GOAL IS, AND ASH
CARTER SECRETARY OF THE DEFENSE
CAME OUT WITH JUST THE OTHER DAY
IN TRYING TO IDENTITY RAMADI,
ROCA AND RAID, RAMADI IN WESTERN
IRAQ.
RAQQAH, THE CAPITAL OF ISIS,
THE EASTERN PART OF SYRIA,
COMMANDO RAIDS TO GO AFTER THE
LEADERS, THAT IS WHAT THEY WANT
TO DO IS PUT PRESSURE ON THOSE
TWO MAIN CITIES THROUGH
OFTENTIMES THROUGH RAIDS,
ISOLATE ISIS IN ITS SOME OF ITS
KEY AREAS, AND SHRINK THE
TERRITORY THAT THEY CONTROL IN
SYRIA AND IRAQ.
THAT'S ONE OF THE MANY
OBJECTIVES THE PENTAGON HAS
MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: ERIC SCHMITT
OF "THE NEW YORK TIMES" JOINING
US FROM WASHINGTON, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SOUTHEAST
ASIAN NATION OF MYANMAR, THE
COUNTRY FORMERLY KNOWN AS BURMA,
IS HOLDING ITS FREEST ELECTION
EVER.
MORE THAN 30 MILLION OF THE
COUNTRY'S 56 MILLION PEOPLE WERE
REGISTERED TO VOTE IN TODAY'S
ELECTION.
AS STAKE IS CONTROL OF THE
NATION'S PARLIAMENT-- STILL
DOMINATED BY THE MILITARY, WHICH
REPRESSIVELY RAN MYANMAR FOR
MOST OF THE PAST 50 YEARS.
THE MILITARY REGIME ALLOWED
LIMITED ELECTIONS IN 2012 AND
IMPLEMENTED REFORMS LEADING THE
U.S. AND ITS ALLIES TO LIFT
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS.
70-YEAR-OLD NOBEL PEACE PRIZE
WINNER AUNG SAN SUU KYI LEADS
THE MAIN OPPOSITION PARTY, AND
SHE IS SEEKING RE-ELECTION TO
HER OWN PARLIAMENT SEAT.
THE ELECTION IS BEING CLOSELY
WATCHED TO SEE IF THE MILITARY
WILL ACCEPT THE RESULTS, WHICH
WILL START TO BE ANNOUNCED
TOMORROW AND WILL TAKE SEVERAL
DAYS.
JOINING ME TO DISCUSS THE
IMPORTANCE OF TODAY'S ELECTION
IN MYANMAR IS SUZANNE DIMAGGIO
FROM "THE NEW AMERICA
FOUNDATION."
>> Sreenivasan: HOW FREE AND
FAIR ARE THESE ELECTIONS.
>> EVERYTHING IS RELATIVE,
ESPECIALLY WHEN IT COMES TO
MYANMAR.
AND IT IS A SIGNIFICANT
ELECTION.
FIRST AND FORE MOST, THERE ARE
OVER 90 PARTIES REGISTERED TO
GIVE CANDIDATES.
THAT IS ASTOUNDING WHEN YOU
THINK OF THIS COUNTRY AS BEING
DOMINATED BY THE MILITARY FOR
HALF A CENTURY.
SECONDLY, THIS IS REALLY THE
FIRST TIME IN TA YEARS THAT
THE-- IN 25 YEARS THAT THE MAJOR
OPPOSITION PARTY HEADED BY AUNG
SAN SUU KYI HAS BEEN ALLOWED TO
CAMPAIGN FREELY THROUGHOUT THE
COUNTRY.
SO FOR MANY MYANMAR PEOPLE, THIS
IS THE FIRST TIME IN THEIR LIVES
THAT THEY HAVE BEEN ABLE TO
PARTICIPATE IN A COMPETITIVE
ELECTION.
>> Sreenivasan: IT'S NOT LIKE
THE MILITARY IS GIVING THEM
COMPLETE CONTROL.
THEY STILL HAVE 25% OF ALL THE
PARLIAMENTARY SEAT, THEY'LL
STILL CONTROL THAT.
>> YES.
WHEN THE GENERALS OF THE JUNTA
DECIDED TO BEGIN A TRANSITION TO
DEMOCRACY, THEY PUT TOGETHER A
CONSTITUTION THAT INSURES THAT
THEY HAVE THE UPPER EDGE.
THEY MAINTAIN 25% OF ALL SEATS
AUTOMATICALLY IN THE PARLIAMENT
WHICH GIVES THEM A CLEAR
ADVANTAGE.
SO WHAT THEY DID WAS FASHIONED
THEMSELVES, GOLDEN PARACHUTES
OUT OF THE OLD SYSTEM, CHANGED
THEIR UNIFORMS, THEY ARE NOW IN
CIVILIAN GARB, BUT MAKE NO
MISTAKE ABOUT IT, THE MILITARY
STILL HOLDS THE ABUNDANCE OF
POWER.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT MEANS
THAT A LOT OF THESE, YOU KNOW,
COMPETITIVE RACES IN ALL THESE
SMALL PLACES, THEY'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO FORM COALITIONS IN ORDER
TO OVERCOME THE POWER THAT THE
MILITARY ALREADY HAS BUILT IN.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
UNLESS AUNG SAN SUU KYI HAS WON
BY A SIGNIFICANT LANDSLIDE.
AND THAT COULD HAPPEN.
BECAUSE WHAT I'M HEARING IS 30
MILLION PEOPLE WERE ELIGIBLE TO
VOTE.
THERE ARE REPORTS THAT AS MANY
AS 80% OF THOSE 30 MILLION CAME
TO THE POLLS.
THAT WOULD TRANSLATE PROBABLY
INTO SUPPORT FOR THE NLD.
COULD BE A LANDSLIDE, BUT IF
IT'S NOT, YOU ARE EXACTLY LIGHT.
THERE ARE BE A LOT OF ALLIANCE,
COALITION BUILDING, THIS
WILL HAVE TO INCLUDE MANY OF THE
SMALLER ETHNIC MINORITY PARTIES.
SO THE BIG QUESTION IS WHETHER
THE LEADER OF MYANMAR HAS THE
SKILL SET TO BE A UNIFIER, THAT
IS REALLY NEEDED TO BRING THIS
COUNTRY TO IT'S NEXT STEP.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE IS THIS
OTHER SPECTER LOOMING WHICH IS
25 YEARS AGO THEY HAD THE
ELECTION, THE MILITARY DIDN'T
LIKE WHAT THEY SAW, CHOSE TO
STAY IN POWER.
>> YES.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT HAPPENS
TOMORROW, NEXT WEEK, NEXT MONTH
WHEN ALL THOSE TOTALS ARE IN AND
MIGHT NOT BE SOMETHING THE
MILITARY LIKES.
>> WELL, THAT'S THE BIGGEST
CONCERN.
25 YEARS AGO THE MILITARY DID
NOT EXPECT THE NLD TO WIN BY A
LANDSLIDE.
THEY WERE CAUGHT BY SURPRISE.
THIS TIME THEY CANNOT SAY THAT
THEY WILL BE CAUGHT BY SURPRISE.
THERE HAVE BEEN PREPARATIONS FOR
THIS.
ALSO THE CURRENT PRESIDENT AND
OTHER MILITARY LEADERS ARE ON
RECORD AS SAYING IF THE NLD WIN,
IF THE OPPOSITION WINS, THEY
WILL RESPECT THAT.
ALSO MYANMAR IS A DIFFERENT
COUNTRY TODAY.
THEY ARE MORE CONNECTED TO THE
REST OF THE WORLD.
THE UNITED STATES HAS NORMALIZED
RELATIONS.
IF THE MILITARY DECIDES NOT TO
MAKE GOOD, IF THE NLD WINS, THIS
WOULD TURN INTO A MAJOR
INTERNATIONAL INCIDENT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
SUZANNE DIMAGGIO, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE
>> Sreenivasan: HOW IS MYANMAR
SHIFTING TOWARD GREATER
DEMOCRACY?
WATCH OUR PRIMER ON SUNDAY'S
HISTORIC VOTE ONLINE.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: REUTERS IS
REPORTING THAT EGYPTIAN
INVESTIGATORS ARE GROWING MORE
CERTAIN THAT AN EXPLOSION IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CRASH OF A
RUSSIAN AIRLINER IN THE SINAI
PENINSULA LAST WEEKEND.
REUTERS QUOTES ONE UNNAMED
MEMBER OF OF THE INVESTIGATION
TEAM AS SAYING THAT IT IS: "90%
SURE IT WAS A BOMB."
THE COMMENT COMES A DAY AFTER
THE HEAD OF THE TEAM SAID
PUBLICLY THERE IS "A NOISE" IN
THE LAST SECOND OF THE COCKPIT
VOICE RECORDING.
DEBRIS FROM THE PLANE WAS
SCATTERED OVER AN EIGHT MILE
AREA, WITH THE TAIL SECTION
THREE MILES FROM THE FUSELAGE.
ALL 224 PEOPLE ON BOARD THE
CHARTERED AIRBUS-321 JET DIED
FLYING FROM SHARM EL-SHEIKH
EGYPT TO SAINT PETERSBURG,
RUSSIA.
THE DEATH TOLL FROM LAST WEEK'S
FIRE IN A CROWDED ROMANIAN MUSIC
CLUB HAS RISEN TO 45 PEOPLE.
THE DRUMMER OF THE HEAVY METAL
BAND THAT WAS PLAYING WHEN THE
FIRE BROKE OUT OCTOBER 30 DIED
TODAY, ALONG WITH THREE OTHER
PEOPLE.
NINE OTHERS DIED YESTERDAY.
DOZENS MORE CLUB-GOERS REMAIN
HOSPITALIZED FOR THEIR BURNS.
THE BLAZE IS BLAMED ON A
FIREWORKS SHOW INSIDE THE
BASEMENT CLUB, WHICH HAD ONLY
ONE EXIT.
A FORMER MAYOR WHO GRANTED THE
CLUB A PERMIT WAS ARRESTED
YESTERDAY.
THAT FOLLOWED THE ARREST LAST
WEEK OF THREE CLUB OWNERS.
>> Sreenivasan: AFTER 68,000
UNACCOMPANIED IMMIGRANT
CHILDREN, MANY FLEEING PERVASIVE
VIOLENCE IN CENTRAL AMERICA,
ARRIVED IN THE UNITED STATES
LAST YEAR, THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION CREATED A PROGRAM
TO ALLOW THESE CHILDREN TO APPLY
FOR REFUGEE STATUS BEFORE
LEAVING THEIR OWN COUNTRIES.
BUT SO FAR, WITH 5,400
APPLICATIONS SUBMITTED-- MOSTLY
FROM EL SALVADOR-- NOT A SINGLE
CHILD HAS ENTERED THE U.S.
THROUGH THE PROGRAM, ACCORDING
TO AN ARTICLE LAST WEEK IN "THE
NEW YORK TIMES."
FOR UNACCOMPANIED MINORS, MAKING
THE CASE TO STAY IN THE U.S. IS
NOT EASY.
THEY ARE NOT GUARANTEED A LAWYER
TO ASSIST THEM.
BUT A CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT THAT
BEGAN WITH A YOUNG WOMAN FROM EL
SALVADOR AS THE LEAD PLAINTIFF
IS CHALLENGING THAT POLICY.
NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO HAS
THE STORY IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE
SEGMENT.
>> Reporter: THE GIRL WE AGREED
TO CALL JESSICA WAS ONLY 14 WHEN
SHE SAID GOODBYE LAST YEAR TO
HER GRANDMOTHER, THE PERSON WHO
RAISED HER, BACK IN EL SALVADOR.
HER JOURNEY THROUGH MEXICO TO
TEXAS TOOK A MONTH.
FOR HER SAFETY, WE AGREED TO
CONCEAL HER IDENTITY.
>> (translated): I FELT
NERVOUS TRAVELING, BECAUSE I HAD
NO IDEA WHAT COULD HAPPEN TO US,
AND I FELT SCARED AT THE SAME
TIME.
>> Reporter: JESSICA AND HER
GRANDMOTHER HAD WORRIED WHAT
WOULD HAPPEN IF SHE DIDN'T
LEAVE.
HER UNCLE, A POLICE OFFICER IN
HER HOME TOWN OF ZACATECOLUCA,
HAD REFUSED TO HAND OVER GUNS
AND UNIFORMS TO MEMBERS OF A
NOTORIOUS DRUG GANG.
IN RETALIATION JESSICA SAYS THE
GANG BEGAN FOLLOWING HER TO
SCHOOL AND HOME, AND THREATENED
TO KIDNAP HER AND OTHER FAMILY
MEMBERS WHO LIVED WITH HER.
>> (translated): IT WAS JUST
PANIC.
WE DIDN'T WANT TO LEAVE THE
HOUSE.
IN MY TOWN, IN ONE WEEK THERE
WERE 29 HOMICIDES BY GANGS.
>> Reporter: JESSICA DECIDED TO
FLEE-- TO TRY TO REJOIN HER
PARENTS WHO HAD LEFT FOR THE
U.S. WHEN SHE WAS JUST A
TODDLER.
THEY HAD FOUND STEADY WORK IN
CALIFORNIA AND HAD BEEN SENDING
MONEY BACK EVER SINCE.
IN JANUARY 2014, WITHOUT PROPER
DOCUMENTS, JESSICA AND THREE
RELATIVES-- ALL YOUNG WOMEN --
LEFT EL SALVADOR TOGETHER.
JESSICA SAYS DURING THEIR
JOURNEY, THEY OFTEN HAD NO FOOD
AND NO PLACE TO SLEEP.
WHEN THEY ARRIVED IN HIDALGO,
TEXAS, BORDER PATROL AGENTS
IMMEDIATELY DETAINED THEM.
>> (translated): I FELT SCARED
AND DESPERATE.
I JUST WANTED TO GET OUT OF THE
ROOM TO SEE THE SUN.
I FELT REALLY NERVOUS, BECAUSE I
HAD NO IDEA WHAT WOULD HAPPEN TO
ME.
>> Reporter: THE NEXT DAY,
BORDER AGENTS TRANSFERRED
JESSICA AND THE TWO TEENAGE
RELATIVES WITH HER TO THE
CUSTODY OF THE OFFICE OF REFUGEE
RESETTLEMENT, KNOWN AS "O.R.R."
THAT'S A BRANCH OF THE FEDERAL
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICE'S TASKED WITH PROVIDING
EMERGENCY SUPPLIES AND SERVICES
TO IMMIGRANT MINORS
UNACCOMPANIED BY ADULTS
WHO ARRIVE IN THE U.S.
O.R.R. PLACED JESSICA IN A YOUTH
SHELTER IN TEXAS FOR A MONTH,
WHERE SHE LEARNED DEPORTATION
PROCEEDINGS AGAINST HER HAD
ALREADY BEGUN AND THAT SHE'D
SOON HAVE TO APPEAR IN COURT,
>> (translated): I DIDN'T KNOW
WHAT I WOULD DO.
WHAT IF THEY ASK ME SOMETHING?
HOW WOULD I RESPOND?
I FELT SO SCARED TO GO IN FRONT
OF A JUDGE.
>> Reporter: O.R.R. GAVE JESSICA
A LIST OF LAWYERS WHO MIGHT
DONATE THEIR TIME, KNOWN AS
WORKING "PRO-BONO," BUT FOR
EIGHT MONTHS, ALL THE LAWYERS
SHE CONTACTED SAID THEY WERE TOO
BUSY TO HELP.
UNLIKE CRIMINAL COURT, IN
IMMIGRATION COURT, THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT IS NOT REQUIRED TO
PROVIDE LAWYERS TO DEFENDANTS
WHO CANNOT AFFORD THEM-- NOT
EVEN TO UNACCOMPANIED MINORS
LIKE JESSICA.
BUT WHETHER OR NOT THEY HAVE A
LAWYER MAKES A BIG DIFFERENCE IN
IMMIGRATION COURT.
73% OF IMMIGRANTS UNDER 21 WITH
LAWYERS ARE ALLOWED TO STAY IN
THE U.S.
THAT'S FIVE TIMES HIGHER THAN
THE 15% OF CHILDREN WITHOUT
LAWYERS WHO ARE ALLOWED TO STAY.
SO FAR THIS YEAR, THERE HAVE
BEEN 19,000 IMMIGRANTS UNDER 21
WHO FILED NEW REQUESTS TO STAY,
AND 62% OF THEM DON'T HAVE A
LAWYER.
AHILAN ARULANANTHAM, AN ATTORNEY
FOR THE AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION, BEGAN REPRESENTING
JESSICA LAST YEAR AS A PLAINTIFF
IN A CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT
BROUGHT BY THE A.C.L.U. AND
OTHER GROUPS AGAINST "O.R.R.,"
"IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS
ENFORCEMENT", AND THE
DEPARTMENTS OF JUSTICE AND
HOMELAND SECURITY.
>> THE NOTION THAT A
TEN-YEAR-OLD BOY FROM
EL SALVADOR, WHO CAN BARELY
SPEAK ANY ENGLISH, CAN ADVANCE
THE CONSTITUTIONAL ARGUMENTS
THAT TRAINED LAWYERS WHO HAVE
GONE TO LAW SCHOOL WOULD MAKE,
IN FEDERAL COURT, IS ABSURD.
>> Reporter: THE PLAINTIFFS SAY
REQUIRING MINORS TO APPEAR IN
COURT WHETHER THEY HAVE A LAWYER
OR NOT VIOLATES THE
CONSTITUTION'S FIFTH AMENDMENT
RIGHT TO DUE PROCESS.
>> WE'RE TALKING ABOUT CHILDREN
WHO HAVE SO MUCH AT STAKE,
BECAUSE SO MANY OF THEM ARE
FLEEING SUCH SEVERE VIOLENCE AND
OTHER FORMS OF PERSECUTION, THE
GOVERNMENT PAYS FOR A LAWYER TO
PROSECUTE THE CHILD.
AS A MATTER OF FAIRNESS, WE
SHOULD ENSURE THAT THE CHILD HAS
A LAWYER AS WELL.
>> THE LAWSUIT IS FRIVOLOUS.
IT'S MERELY A POLITICAL STUNT.
>> Reporter: MARK KRIKORIAN OF
WASHINGTON'S CENTER FOR
IMMIGRATION STUDIES, WHICH
ADVOCATES TIGHTER BORDER
SECURITY, THINKS THE A.C.L.U.
LAWSUIT IS WITHOUT MERIT.
>> IF YOU'RE AN AMERICAN IN
BANKRUPTCY COURT, IN FORECLOSURE
PROCEEDINGS, IN DIVORCE COURT,
YOU DON'T GET A LAWYER PAID FOR
BY THE TAXPAYER.
WHY ARE ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
REALLY BETTER THAN AMERICANS?
THEY'RE DESERVING OF MORE RIGHTS
AND MORE TAXPAYER FUNDS THAN
AMERICANS?
BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT THE A.C.L.U.
IS SAYING.
>> Reporter: THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY REPORTS THAT
MOST UNACCOMPANIED MINORS DO
COME FROM SOME OF THE MOST
DANGEROUS COUNTRIES IN CENTRAL
AMERICA, INCLUDING MEXICO, EL
SALVADOR, GUATEMALA, AND
HONDURAS.
THIS 19-YEAR-OLD FLED THE
VIOLENCE IN HONDURAS LAST YEAR.
WE AGREED TO CALL HIM JACOB FOR
THIS REPORT.
HE SAYS HE HAS NO FAMILY TO
RETURN TO, BECAUSE HIS FATHER
WAS MURDERED BY A DRUG GANG, AND
HIS MOTHER HAS BEEN IN A
HONDURAN PRISON HIS ENTIRE LIFE.
>> (translated): IN MY COUNTRY
PEOPLE LIKE ME HAVE ONE DESTINY,
WHICH IS TO END UP IN A GANG.
YOU'RE BASICALLY LIKE A PRISONER
BECAUSE THEY'LL RECRUIT YOU BY
FORCE.
IT'S A DEATH SENTENCE.
YOU JOIN THE GANG, YOU GET
KILLED.
YOU DON'T JOIN, THEY KILL YOU.
THAT IS THE LIFE FOR YOUNG
PEOPLE.
YOU'RE BASICALLY PLAYING WITH
YOUR LIFE WHEN YOU DECIDE TO
COME.
BUT WE DID IT BECAUSE WE TRULY
ARE FLEEING MUCH WORSE BACK
HOME.
>> Reporter: BUT JACOB DIDN'T
GET PAST THE TEXAS BORDER AND
SOON FOUND HIMSELF IN
DEPORTATION PROCEEDINGS.
WITHOUT A LAWYER.
A SPOKESMAN FOR "O.R.R." SAYS IT
INVITES LEGAL EXPERTS TO
EXPLAIN-- IN SPANISH-- TO ALL
UNACCOMPANIED MINORS THEIR
RIGHTS AND COURT PROCEDURES,
ALLOCATING $9 MILLION FOR THE
EFFORT.
>> YOUR HONOR, IT'S INCREDIBLY
EASY.
>> Reporter: IN A FEDERAL COURT
HEARING LAST YEAR, DEPUTY
ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL LEON
FRESCO ARGUED: IF UNACCOMPANIED
MINORS FEEL THEIR CASES WERE
HANDLED UNFAIRLY DUE TO A LACK
OF REPRESENTATION, THEY CAN
APPEAL THE DECISION BY FILLING
OUT A SIMPLE, ONE-PAGE FORM.
FRESCO ALSO SAID ORDERING THE
GOVERNMENT TO PROVIDE LAWYERS TO
UNACCOMPANIED MINORS WITHOUT
PROPER FUNDING FROM CONGRESS
WOULD SEND THE MESSAGE THAT,
"THE BORDER IS COMPLETELY OPEN
TO CHILDREN UNDER 18."
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT HAS
REQUESTED $50 MILLION TO PAY FOR
LAWYERS FOR UNACCOMPANIED
MINORS.
BUT A U.S. SENATOR BLOCKED IT.
ALABAMA REPUBLICAN RICHARD
SHELBY CHAIRS THE U.S. SENATE
SUBCOMMITTEE WHICH OVERSEES THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT'S BUDGET.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF WAYS TO
REPRESENT DUE PROCESS OF THE
CHILDREN AS THEY GO THROUGH THE
IMMIGRATION COURTS AND SO FORTH.
PRO-BONO AND ALL KIND OF GROUPS
OF LAWYERS THAT ARE TIED INTO
THE IMMIGRATION TO DO THIS EVERY
YEAR.
TO ADD $50 MILLION MORE,
HARDWORKING TAXPAYERS' MONEY TO
THAT IS SOMETHING I WOULD NOT
DO.
>> Reporter: INSTEAD, SENATOR
SHELBY WANTS TO SEE A GREATER
FOCUS ON TIGHTENING OUR BORDERS.
>> WE ALL HAVE SYMPATHY AND HOPE
AND WANT OTHER PEOPLE IN THE
WORLD TO BE WELL.
STARTING WITH CHILDREN, STARTING
WITH ADULTS, WHERE THEY'RE
OPPRESSED AND WHERE THEY DON'T
HAVE OPPORTUNITIES WE HAVE.
BUT WE CAN'T TAKE EVERYBODY IN
THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: SO IN YOUR OPINION,
WHO QUALIFIES FOR ASYLUM?
>> THAT WOULD BE, IT WOULDN'T BE
UP TO ME.
WE'VE HAD MILLIONS AND MILLIONS
OF LEGAL IMMIGRANTS AND
POLITICAL REFUGEES.
BUT WE'VE ALSO HAD TOO MANY
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS.
AND IF WE DON'T PROTECT OUR
BORDERS, AND IF PEOPLE DON'T
HAVE A RESPECT FOR OUR LAWS,
WHETHER THEY LIVE HERE OR
THEY'RE COMING HERE, WE'RE GOING
TO HAVE A NATION OF CHAOS.
>> Reporter: SHELBY DOES SUPPORT
ALLOCATING FUNDS FOR MORE JUDGES
TO PROCESS UNACCOMPANIED MINOR
CASES FASTER.
CURRENTLY THERE IS A BACKLOG OF
456,000 IMMIGRATION CASES
INVOLVING MINORS AND ADULTS,
EACH CASE TAKES, ON AVERAGE,
16 MONTHS TO COMPLETE, ACCORDING
TO SYRACUSE UNIVERSITY
RESEARCHERS, WHO ALSO FOUND IN
CASES WHERE IMMIGRANTS
PREVAILED, THE CASES TOOK
LONGER-- AN AVERAGE OF
30 MONTHS.
>> WE NEED TO UNDO THE
BOTTLENECK.
BUT WE NEED TO MAKE SURE THAT
OUR LAWS ARE OBEYED, THAT OUR
BORDERS ARE PROTECTED AND THAT
WE DO NOT WASTE TAXPAYERS'
MONEY.
I THINK IT GOES RIGHT BACK TO
THESE PEOPLE, WHETHER CHILDREN
OR ADULTS, HAVE COME HERE
ILLEGALLY.
AND THE SOONER WE PROCESS THEM
AND SEND THEM BACK HOME, THE
BETTER OFF WE ARE.
>> Reporter: BUT WITHOUT A
LAWYER, THE A.C.L.U.'S AHILAN
ARULANANTHAM SAYS UNACCOMPANIED
MINORS WHO DON'T SPEAK ENGLISH
CAN'T MAKE SENSE OF THE COMPLEX
SET OF RELIEF OPTIONS AVAILABLE.
>> THE FEDERAL COURTS HAVE
REPEATEDLY COMPARED THE
IMMIGRATION CODE TO THE TAX CODE
IN ITS COMPLEXITY.
IT'S BEEN CALLED LIKE A
LABYRINTH, LIKE A MAZE.
AND THAT'S NOT AN
UNDERSTATEMENT, HAVING DONE
IMMIGRATION-RELATED WORK FOR
15 YEARS.
EVEN I DON'T UNDERSTAND MANY,
MANY ASPECTS OF THE IMMIGRATION
LAW.
>> Reporter: JESSICA IS ONE OF
27,000 UNACCOMPANIED MINORS WHO
WERE RELEASED TO U.S.-BASED
RELATIVES LAST YEAR, WHILE THEIR
DEPORTATION CASES WERE PENDING.
SHE WAS ABLE TO REUNITE WITH THE
PARENTS SHE HAD NOT SEEN SINCE
SHE WAS A TODDLER, IN LOS
ANGELES.
WHILE HER MOTHER REMAINS
UNDOCUMENTED, HER FATHER, A
TRUCK DRIVER, HAS A VISA TO WORK
IN THE U.S.
HE FOUND A PRO-BONO LAWYER TO
TAKE JESSICA'S CASE.
>> (translated): IF I WERE
DEPORTED, I'D BE TERRIFIED TO GO
BACK.
ALL OF MY DREAMS, MY PLANS,
WOULD CRUMBLE.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THE GANGS
WOULD DO TO ME.
>> Reporter: JESSICA'S NEXT
HEARING IS LATER THIS MONTH.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: A NEW STUDY BY
ITALIAN RESEARCHERS HAS FOUND
THAT SMOG IS WEARING DOWN MANY
OF ROME'S MOST FAMOUS MONUMENTS.
AND IN PARIS, THE EIFFEL TOWER
IS NOW BEING USED TO MONITOR AIR
QUALITY.
THE NEWSHOUR'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: THE NEW STUDY BY
ITALY IS OFFERING PROOF THAT
ANCIENT ROME IS FEELING THE
EFFECTS OF MODERN POLLUTION.
THIS STATUE OF THE EMPEROR
TRAJAN IS TURNING BLACK, AS ARE
FOUNTAINS, LIKE BERNINI'S FAMOUS
FOUR RIVERS" IN PIAZZA NAVONNA.
THESE ARE JUST TWO OF 3,600
MONUMENTS AT RISK, ACCORDING TO
THE RESEARCHERS WHO'VE BEEN
TRACKING EROSION, CORROSION, AND
COLOR CHANGE ON THE CITY'S SITES
FOR 15 YEARS.
>> (translated): A MONUMENT
WHOSE MATERIAL IS FRAGILE,
BECAUSE IT'S BEEN WEAKENED OVER
THE TIME, WILL BE A LOT MORE
VULNERABLE THAN A MONUMENT
THAT'S MUCH BETTER PRESERVED.
>> Reporter: ROME'S SMOG
PRESENTS PRESERVATIONISTS WITH A
DIFFICULT CHOICE.
THE DUST ON STATUES AND
MONUMENTS, WHILE CORROSIVE,
CAN SERVE AS A PROTECTIVE LAYER
AGAINST AIR POLLUTION.
900 MILES WEST ACROSS THE
CONTINENT, FRANCE'S MOST FAMOUS
LANDMARK IS HELPING TRACK
POLLUTION IN PARIS.
THIS SENSOR MOUNTED ON THE
EIFFEL TOWER MONITORS THE CITY'S
AIR QUALITY.
>> (translated): THE
MONITORING STATIONS WE HAVE ON
THE EIFFEL TOWER ALLOW US TO
BETTER UNDERSTAND THE AIR
POLLUTION DISPERSION FROM UP
HERE, BUT ALSO TO GIVE US A
DAY'S LEVELS FROM SUCH A HEIGHT
WHICH WILL BE DIFFERENT TO OTHER
STATIONS ON THE GROUND AROUND
PARIS.
>> Reporter: MUCH OF PARIS'
POLLUTION COMES FROM
AUTOMOBILES.
WHILE FRANCE HAS WORKED TO LIMIT
EMISSIONS, THE COUNTRY'S
RELATIVELY HIGH VOLUME OF DIESEL
CARS THAT EMIT NITROGEN OXIDE
MAKE THE PROBLEM HARDER TO
SOLVE.
ON OCCASION THE CITY HAS LOWERED
SPEED LIMITS TO REDUCE CAR
EMISSIONS AND AIR POLLUTION, AND
STUDIED HOW THIS AFFECTS AIR
QUALITY.
THE HEIGHT OF THE EIFFEL TOWER
MONITORS HELP RESEARCHERS
UNDERSTAND HOW POLLUTION IS
DISPERSED AS IT GOES HIGHER INTO
THE AIR.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY
TONIGHT, AN ACOUSTIC GUITAR JOHN
LENNON USED TO COWRITE "I WANT
TO HOLD YOUR HAND," "PLEASE
PLEASE ME," "SHE LOVES YOU" AND
OTHER EARLY BEATLES HITS IS SOLD
FOR $2.4 MILLION, A RECORD FOR A
ROCK 'N' ROLL INSTRUMENT.
THE AUCTION SOLD THE 1962 GIBSON
IN CALIFORNIA LAST NIGHT, A LOCK
OF LENNON'S HAIR WITH AN
INSCRIBED CARD SOLD FOR
$25,000.
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR, THE
EPIDEMIC OF DIABETES IN MEXICO,
AND ONE APPROACH TO IMPROVING
ACCESS TO MUCH NEEDED MEDICAL
CARE.
THAT'S ALL FOR PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.